Ruby: data flow docs (#10932)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-language-guides/analyzing-data-flow-in-ruby.rst

.. _analyzing-data-flow-in-ruby:

Analyzing data flow in Ruby
=============================

You can use CodeQL to track the flow of data through a Ruby program to places where the data is used.

About this article
------------------

This article describes how data flow analysis is implemented in the CodeQL libraries for Ruby and includes examples to help you write your own data flow queries.
The following sections describe how to use the libraries for local data flow, global data flow, and taint tracking.
For a more general introduction to modeling data flow, see ":ref:`About data flow analysis <about-data-flow-analysis>`."

Local data flow
---------------

> Local data flow is data flow within a single method or callable. Local data flow is easier, faster, and more precise than global data flow, and is sufficient for many queries.

Author: There are a couple of uses of it as *part* of a query, but I think those uses are too complicated to serve as helpful examples.

> Local data flow is data flow within a single method or callable. Local data flow is easier, faster, and more precise than global data flow, and is sufficient for many queries.

Reviewer: Okay. Thanks for checking ✨

Using local data flow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The local data flow library is in the module ``DataFlow`` and it defines the class ``Node``, representing any element through which data can flow.
``Node``\ s are divided into expression nodes (``ExprNode``) and parameter nodes (``ParameterNode``).

> You can map between a data flow ``ParameterNode`` and its corresponding ``Parameter`` AST node using the ``asParameter`` member predicate.
> Meanwhile, the ``asExpr`` member predicate maps between a data flow ``ExprNode`` and its corresponding ``ExprCfgNode`` in the control-flow library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can map a data flow ``ParameterNode`` to its corresponding ``Parameter`` AST node using the ``asParameter`` member predicate.
Similarly, you can use the ``asExpr`` member predicate to map a data flow ``ExprNode`` to its corresponding ``ExprCfgNode`` in the control-flow library.
```

.. code-block:: ql

     class Node {
       /** Gets the expression corresponding to this node, if any. */
       CfgNodes::ExprCfgNode asExpr() { ... }

       /** Gets the parameter corresponding to this node, if any. */
       Parameter asParameter() { ... }

      ...
     }

You can also use the predicates ``exprNode`` and ``parameterNode``:

.. code-block:: ql

     /**
      * Gets a node corresponding to expression `e`.
      */
     ExprNode exprNode(CfgNodes::ExprCfgNode e) { ... }

     /**
      * Gets the node corresponding to the value of parameter `p` at function entry.
      */
     ParameterNode parameterNode(Parameter p) { ... }

Note that since ``asExpr`` and ``exprNode`` map between data-flow and control-flow nodes, you then need to call the ``getExpr`` member predicate on the control-flow node to map to the corresponding AST node,

> e.g. by writing ``node.asExpr().getExpr()``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for example, by writing ``node.asExpr().getExpr()``.
```

> Due to the control-flow graph being split, there can be multiple data-flow and control-flow nodes associated with a single expression AST node.

Reviewer: > Due to the control-flow graph being split

I'm not sure about this, will suggest an alternative wording, but I may well have misunderstood.

```suggestion
A control-flow graph considers every way control can flow through code, consequently, there can be multiple data-flow and control-flow nodes associated with a single expression node in the AST.
```

Author: I think you understood perfectly, thanks.

The predicate ``localFlowStep(Node nodeFrom, Node nodeTo)`` holds if there is an immediate data flow edge from the node ``nodeFrom`` to the node ``nodeTo``.
You can apply the predicate recursively, by using the ``+`` and ``*`` operators, or you can use the predefined recursive predicate ``localFlow``.

For example, you can find flow from an expression ``source`` to an expression ``sink`` in zero or more local steps:

.. code-block:: ql

     DataFlow::localFlow(source, sink)

Using local taint tracking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Local taint tracking extends local data flow by including non-value-preserving flow steps.

Reviewer: > non-value-preserving flow steps

Can we rephrase this? Maybe:

```suggestion
Local taint tracking extends local data flow to include flow steps where values are not preserved, for example, string manipulation.
```

For example:

.. code-block:: ruby

     temp = x
     y = temp + ", " + temp

If ``x`` is a tainted string then ``y`` is also tainted.

The local taint tracking library is in the module ``TaintTracking``.
Like local data flow, a predicate ``localTaintStep(DataFlow::Node nodeFrom, DataFlow::Node nodeTo)`` holds if there is an immediate taint propagation edge from the node ``nodeFrom`` to the node ``nodeTo``.
You can apply the predicate recursively, by using the ``+`` and ``*`` operators, or you can use the predefined recursive predicate ``localTaint``.

For example, you can find taint propagation from an expression ``source`` to an expression ``sink`` in zero or more local steps:

.. code-block:: ql

     TaintTracking::localTaint(source, sink)

Using local sources
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When asking for local data flow or taint propagation between two expressions as above, you would normally constrain the expressions to be relevant to a certain investigation.
> The next section will give some concrete examples, but there is a more abstract concept that we should call out explicitly, namely that of a local source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When exploring local data flow or taint propagation between two expressions as above, you would normally constrain the expressions to be relevant to your investigation.
The next section gives some concrete examples, but first it's helpful to introduce the concept of a local source.
```

A local source is a data-flow node with no local data flow into it.
As such, it is a local origin of data flow, a place where a new value is created.

> This includes parameters (which only receive global data flow) and most expressions (because they are not value-preserving).

Reviewer: Maybe?

```suggestion
This includes parameters (which only receive values from global data flow) and most expressions (because they are not value-preserving).
```

The class ``LocalSourceNode`` represents data-flow nodes that are also local sources.
It comes with a useful member predicate ``flowsTo(DataFlow::Node node)``, which holds if there is local data flow from the local source to ``node``.

> Examples
> ~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples of local data flow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

This query finds the filename argument passed in each call to ``File.open``:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    from DataFlow::CallNode call
    where call = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open")
    select call.getArgument(0)

Notice the use of the ``API`` module for referring to library methods.

> For more information, see ":doc:`Using API graphs in Ruby <using-api-graphs-in-ruby>`."

Reviewer: This is causing the most recently reported Sphinx failure. The article does not exist on this branch, it's in Arthur's PR: https://github.com/github/codeql/pull/10957.

Reviewer: @nickrolfe - I'm not sure of the best approach for this link. If we expect Arthur's PR to be merged soon, then we can just wait and update from `main` to get the tests passing and to be able to review the generated article. Otherwise, we might need to comment it out temporarily.

Unfortunately this will only give the expression in the argument, not the values which could be passed to it.
So we use local data flow to find all expressions that flow into the argument:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    from DataFlow::CallNode call, DataFlow::ExprNode expr
    where
      call = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open") and
      DataFlow::localFlow(expr, call.getArgument(0))
    select call, expr

Many expressions flow to the same call.
If you run this query, you may notice that you get several data-flow nodes for an expression as it flows towards a call (notice repeated locations in the ``call`` column).
We are mostly interested in the "first" of these, what might be called the local source for the file name.

> To restrict attention to such local sources, and to simultaneously make the analysis more performant, we have the QL class ``LocalSourceNode``.
> We could demand that ``expr`` is such a node:

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
To restrict the results to local sources for the file name, and to simultaneously make the analysis more efficient, we can use the CodeQL class ``LocalSourceNode``.
We can update the query to specify that ``expr`` is an instance of a ``LocalSourceNode``.
```

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    from DataFlow::CallNode call, DataFlow::ExprNode expr
    where
      call = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open") and
      DataFlow::localFlow(expr, call.getArgument(0)) and
      expr instanceof DataFlow::LocalSourceNode
    select call, expr

> However, we could also enforce this by casting.

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
An alternative approach to limit the results to local sources for the file name is to enforce this by casting.
```

That would allow us to use the member predicate ``flowsTo`` on ``LocalSourceNode`` like so:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    from DataFlow::CallNode call, DataFlow::ExprNode expr
    where
      call = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open") and
      expr.(DataFlow::LocalSourceNode).flowsTo(call.getArgument(0))
    select call, expr

As an alternative, we can ask more directly that ``expr`` is a local source of the first argument, via the predicate ``getALocalSource``:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    from DataFlow::CallNode call, DataFlow::ExprNode expr
    where
      call = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open") and
      expr = call.getArgument(0).getALocalSource()
    select call, expr

All these three queries give identical results.
We now mostly have one expression per call.

We may still have cases of more than one expression flowing to a call, but then they flow through different code paths (possibly due to control-flow splitting).

> We might want to make the source more specific, for example a parameter to a method or block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We might want to make the source more specific, for example, a parameter to a method or block.
```

This query finds instances where a parameter is used as the name when opening a file:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    from DataFlow::CallNode call, DataFlow::ParameterNode p
    where
      call = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open") and
      DataFlow::localFlow(p, call.getArgument(0))
    select call, p

Using the exact name supplied via the parameter may be too strict.
If we want to know if the parameter influences the file name, we can use taint tracking instead of data flow.

> This query finds calls to ``File.open`` where the filename is derived from a parameter:

Reviewer: For consistency:

```suggestion
This query finds calls to ``File.open`` where the file name is derived from a parameter:
```

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.TaintTracking
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    from DataFlow::CallNode call, DataFlow::ParameterNode p
    where
      call = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open") and
      TaintTracking::localTaint(p, call.getArgument(0))
    select call, p

Global data flow
----------------

Global data flow tracks data flow throughout the entire program, and is therefore more powerful than local data flow.
However, global data flow is less precise than local data flow, and the analysis typically requires significantly more time and memory to perform.

.. pull-quote:: Note

   .. include:: ../reusables/path-problem.rst

Using global data flow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The global data flow library is used by extending the class ``DataFlow::Configuration``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the global data flow library by extending the class ``DataFlow::Configuration``:
```

For global flow, it is also useful to restrict sources to instances of ``LocalSourceNode``.
The predefined sources generally do that.

Class hierarchy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  ``DataFlow::Configuration`` - base class for custom global data flow analysis.
-  ``DataFlow::Node`` - an element behaving as a data-flow node.
    -  ``DataFlow::LocalSourceNode`` - a local origin of data, as a data-flow node.
    -  ``DataFlow::ExprNode`` - an expression behaving as a data-flow node.
    -  ``DataFlow::ParameterNode`` - a parameter data-flow node representing the value of a parameter at method/block entry.

    -  ``RemoteFlowSource`` - data flow from network/remote input.
    -  ``Concepts::SystemCommandExecution`` - a data-flow node that executes an operating system command, for instance by spawning a new process.
    -  ``Concepts::FileSystemAccess`` - a data-flow node that performs a file system access, including reading and writing data, creating and deleting files and folders, checking and updating permissions, and so on.
    -  ``Concepts::Path::PathNormalization`` - a data-flow node that performs path normalization. This is often needed in order to safely access paths.

>     -  ``Concepts::CodeExecution`` - a data-flow node that dynamically executes Python code.

Reviewer: Typo?

```suggestion
    -  ``Concepts::CodeExecution`` - a data-flow node that dynamically executes Ruby code.
```

Author: Good catch. This whole document was adapted from the equivalent doc for Python, so I just missed this.

    -  ``Concepts::SqlExecution`` - a data-flow node that executes SQL statements.
    -  ``Concepts::HTTP::Server::RouteSetup`` - a data-flow node that sets up a route on a server.
    -  ``Concepts::HTTP::Server::HttpResponse`` - a data-flow node that creates an HTTP response on a server.

-  ``TaintTracking::Configuration`` - base class for custom global taint tracking analysis.

> Examples
> ~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples of global data flow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> This query shows a data flow configuration that uses all network input as data sources:

Reviewer: Is it possible to expand the explanations in this section a little?

Author: I've pushed a commit that expands these.

Reviewer: Thank you 💖

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    from DataFlow::CallNode call, DataFlow::ExprNode expr
    where
      call = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open") and
      DataFlow::localFlow(expr, call.getArgument(0))
    select call, expr

Many expressions flow to the same call.
If you run this query, you may notice that you get several data-flow nodes for an expression as it flows towards a call (notice repeated locations in the ``call`` column).
We are mostly interested in the "first" of these, what might be called the local source for the file name.
To restrict attention to such local sources, and to simultaneously make the analysis more performant, we have the QL class ``LocalSourceNode``.
We could demand that ``expr`` is such a node:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    from DataFlow::CallNode call, DataFlow::ExprNode expr
    where
      call = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open") and
      DataFlow::localFlow(expr, call.getArgument(0)) and
      expr instanceof DataFlow::LocalSourceNode
    select call, expr

> However, we could also enforce this by casting.

Reviewer 2: Personally I'd just change the type of `expr` to `DataFlow::LocalSourceNode`. Would that be any clearer?

Author: I think it would be, but if we're going to do that, we should also do it in the Python docs.

Similar to global data flow, the characteristic predicate (``MyTaintTrackingConfiguration()``) defines the unique name of the configuration and the taint analysis is performed using the predicate ``hasFlow(DataFlow::Node source, DataFlow::Node sink)``.

Predefined sources and sinks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The data flow library contains a number of predefined sources and sinks, providing a good starting point for defining data flow based security queries.

-  The class ``RemoteFlowSource`` (defined in module ``codeql.ruby.dataflow.RemoteFlowSources``) represents data flow from remote network inputs. This is useful for finding security problems in networked services.
-  The library ``Concepts`` (defined in module ``codeql.ruby.Concepts``) contains several subclasses of ``DataFlow::Node`` that are security relevant, such as ``FileSystemAccess`` and ``SqlExecution``.

For global flow, it is also useful to restrict sources to instances of ``LocalSourceNode``.
The predefined sources generally do that.

Class hierarchy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  ``DataFlow::Configuration`` - base class for custom global data flow analysis.

> -  ``DataFlow::Node`` - an element behaving as a data-flow node.

Reviewer 2: How about `LocalSourceNode` as well?

This data flow configuration tracks data flow from environment variables to opening files:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.DataFlow
    import codeql.ruby.controlflow.CfgNodes
    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs
    
    class EnvironmentToFileConfiguration extends DataFlow::Configuration {
      EnvironmentToFileConfiguration() { this = "EnvironmentToFileConfiguration" }
    
      override predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
        exists(ExprNodes::ConstantReadAccessCfgNode env |
          env.getExpr().getName() = "ENV" and
          env = source.asExpr().(ExprNodes::ElementReferenceCfgNode).getReceiver()
        )
      }
    
      override predicate isSink(DataFlow::Node sink) {
        sink = API::getTopLevelMember("File").getAMethodCall("open").getArgument(0)
      }
    }
    
    from EnvironmentToFileConfiguration config, DataFlow::Node environment, DataFlow::Node fileOpen
    where config.hasFlow(environment, fileOpen)
    select fileOpen, "This call to 'File.open' uses data from $@.", environment,
      "an environment variable"

Further reading
---------------

> - ":ref:`Exploring data flow with path queries <exploring-data-flow-with-path-queries>`"

Reviewer 2: Double-check is this link working?

Reviewer: I've added a commit that I think will fix the PR check 🤞🏻
